music is the most universal language
that we have way more so than any
dialect or tongue you can play a melody
to a child in China and the same melody
to a child in South Africa and despite
the huge differences between those two
children they will still draw some of
the same truths from that melody now I
think the reason why music has this
universality this way of speaking to
each and every one of us is that somehow
it's capable of holding up a mirror to
us that it reveals in some smaller large
way a little bit of who or what we are
okay by logical extension of this if
music is this universal force then
surely groups of musicians let's call
them orchestras should reflect every
aspect of the community logical but not
necessarily true at TEDx Brussels today
we've been looking forward to the future
50 years from now I'm going to ask you
to go in the other direction for a
minute and to come back with me 50 years
into the past the early 1960s to be
precise and if you took a look at all
the great orchestras of the world at
that time a snapshot how many women do
you think you would find playing in
those orchestras the answer virtually
none well here we are 50 years on in 20
2011 and pretty much every Orchestra on
the planet has a fantastic and healthy
balance between the sexes of course I
hear you say totally logical
well how about another aspect of the
community the disabled community do we
find them well represented in the great
orchestras of our world well I can tell
you as a conductor I work with
orchestras around the world all the time
and I can count on the fingers of one
hand the number of disabled musicians
I've encountered in any orchestra
anywhere
why is this you can't tell me that there
aren't millions upon millions of
prodigiously gifted musicians of
disability around the world where is
their platform where is the
infrastructure that creates a space for
them so that they can collaborate with
other great musicians so ladies and
gentleman you can probably tell I'm on a
bit of a mission and this mission has a
personal root to it I have four children
the youngest of whom was born with
cerebral palsy
she's now five and through her glorious
existence
I suppose I have now become a fully
paid-up member of the amazing dizzyingly
wonderful disabled community and a
family start looking at the Paralympics
and thinking what an incredible model
that is it's taken a good five decades
actually but I can say with hand on
heart that when the Paralympics comes to
London next year there will not be an
intelligent person anywhere on the
planet who does not absolutely believe
in the validity of disabled sports
people what an amazing position to be in
so ladies and gentlemen where the hell
is music in all this apologies to any of
you who are sports fans but music is far
more Universal and sport where is the
platform where is their voice so we in
the UK are at the very early stages in
forming what will be Britain's first
ever national disabled Orchestra we're
going to call it the British
paraorchestra because with the world's
eyes on London next year and
particularly on the Paralympics we want
to throw down the gauntlet to every
single other country that is represented
there to say to them here's our para
Orchestra where's yours
every country should have a multiplicity
of para orchestras of all shapes and
sizes no question now today is a very
special day for me because it is the
first time that the first four members
of my little embryonic paraorchestra are
going to play in public for
extraordinary musicians of which the
number will grow and grow I hope in the
end the peril orchestra could even be as
big as big
50 musicians we present to you today a
little Sonic Adventure a little piece of
kind of improvisational whimsy if you
like a piece which of course the ink is
still wet
the clay is still wet after all
improvisation is never a fixed thing we
decided what we wanted to share with you
at the heart of our improvisation was a
tune which is beloved of British people
it's one of the only folk melodies that
we still recognize in our culture and
here's an interesting thing folk music
can tell you an awful lot about the
cultural DNA of the country from which
it originates you see we in Britain we
are quietly melancholic you know the
rain it does rain that the foods not so
good quietly melancholic not blackly so
just quietly so and as Shakespeare put
it so brilliantly in Twelfth Night he
loves music that has a dying fool so
this melody Greensleeves is chock-full
of dying full you may know this tune da
da da da da da dying from da da da da da
da da da da da da da our brief burst of
sunshine this gentleman the chorus your
daughter died I mean I don't know that I
okay it's like we need some melodic
viagra in our culture ladies gentlemen
it goes without saying that we are very
much at the starting gates with this
project we need your help we need the
global community to help us to live this
dream so this orchestra can be full
steam ahead by summer 2012 if you think
there's any way that you can help us
please please get in touch and so ladies
and gentlemen it gives me enormous pride
pleasure and joy to introduce you with a
short improvisation upon that most
melancholic tune Queen Steve's
the first four members of the British
paraorchestra
you